src/pipe/modules/jddcnn/readme.md, before:

# jddcnn: joined denoising and demosaicing convolutional neural network

this implements an integrated version of Benoit Brummer's cnn denoiser
based on his raw natural image dataset. in particular this is compatile
with [the weights produced by this fork here.](https://github.com/hanatos/rawnind_jddc/tree/jddcnn)
the fork replaces the u-net by a slightly simpler one, following the
open image denoise architecture by Attila Afra.

<div class="compare_box">
<textarea readonly style="background-image:url(denoise-off.jpg)"></textarea>
<textarea readonly style="background-image:url(denoise-on.jpg)" ></textarea>
</div>
image by piratenpanda (pixls.us), CC-BY-SA

the weights are read from `~/.config/vkdt/data/jddcnn-weights-heavy.dat` or,
for the slightly more light-weight variant with only 16 base channels
`~/.config/vkdt/data/jddcnn-weights-light.dat`.
download links will follow once the training converged.

in the pipeline it replaces denoising and demosaicing.
at the time of writing, the input should be the output of the `denoise` module, with
`strength` set to zero (i.e. crop black borders and rescale black and white points only).

the input is rggb bayer data in four planes of half resolution, scaled to the [0,1] range.
that is, the input should be *after* the `denoise` module (but be sure to leave the
denoising strength at 0). this way, the black borders will be cropped and the data
will be rescaled to the correct range.

the original glsl cooperative matrix convolution code was written by [Adrien
Vannson](https://github.com/AdrienVannson/gpu-denoising.git).

a word of warning: this module is *extremely slow*. it can take like a full
second on a 42MP image (RTX 3080 Ti). you might want to directly route out the
result via `o-exr` (select `custom` primaries in the export widget to route the
image matrix out to exr, or maybe you want to export after input device
transform in the `colour` module) and then do the rest of the grading on the
exr for faster interaction.

as a sidenote, [working with neural networks is pretty exciting](https://youtu.be/4h-wVe9a6rQ?t=116).

## parameters

* `model` use the heavy model (8.6M parameters) or the lighter one with 2M parameters

## connectors

* `input` a raw rggb bayer pattern image, after the denoise module scaled it to [0,1]
* `output` the denoised and demosaiced rgb image

Commit message:

jddcnn: update docs + low leaky relu

src/pipe/modules/jddcnn/readme.md, after:

# jddcnn: joined denoising and demosaicing convolutional neural network

this implements an integrated cnn denoiser based on Attila Afra's open image
denoise architecture. in particular this is compatile with [the weights
produced by this fork here.](https://codeberg.org/hanatos/oidn/src/branch/main/training).
the fork introduces minor differences to the u-net, mainly leaky relu
parameter, channel counts, and pixel shuffles on both ends to account for bayer
patters. note that this does not work with fuji xtrans or full colour images.

<div class="compare_box">
<textarea readonly style="background-image:url(denoise-off.jpg)"></textarea>
<textarea readonly style="background-image:url(denoise-on.jpg)" ></textarea>
</div>
image by piratenpanda (pixls.us), CC-BY-SA

the weights are read from `~/.config/vkdt/data/jddcnn-weights-heavy.dat` or,
for the slightly more light-weight variant with only 16 base channels
`~/.config/vkdt/data/jddcnn-weights-light.dat`.
download links will follow once the training converged.

in the pipeline it replaces denoising and demosaicing.
the input is rggb bayer data in four planes of half resolution, scaled to the
[0,1] range. that is, the input should be *after* the `denoise` module (but be
sure to leave the denoising strength at 0). this way, the black borders will be
cropped and the data will be rescaled to the correct range.

the original glsl cooperative matrix convolution code was written by [Adrien
Vannson](https://github.com/AdrienVannson/gpu-denoising.git).

a word of warning: this module is *extremely slow*. it can take like a full
second on a 42MP image (RTX 3080 Ti). you might want to directly route out the
result via `o-exr` (select `custom` primaries in the export widget to route the
camera rgb along with the image matrix out to exr, or maybe you want to export
after input device transform in the `colour` module) and then do the rest of
the grading on the exr for faster interaction.

as a sidenote, [working with neural networks is pretty exciting](https://youtu.be/4h-wVe9a6rQ?t=116).

## parameters

* `model` use the heavy model (8.6M parameters) or the lighter one with 2M parameters

## connectors

* `input` a raw rggb bayer pattern image, after the denoise module scaled it to [0,1]
* `output` the denoised and demosaiced rgb image
